ONCE upon a time, many years ago when our grandfathers were little
children—there was a doctor; and his name was Dolittle—John Dolittle,
M.D. "M.D." means that he was a proper doctor and knew a whole lot.
He lived in a little town called, Puddleby-on-the-Marsh. All the folks,
young and old, knew him well by sight. And whenever he walked down
the street in his high hat everyone would say, "There goes the Doctor!—
He's a clever man." And the dogs and the children would all run up and
follow behind him; and even the crows that lived in the church-tower
would caw and nod their heads.
The house he lived in, on the edge of the town, was quite small; but his
garden was very large and had a wide lawn and stone seats and
weeping-willows hanging over. His sister, Sarah Dolittle, was
housekeeper for him; but the Doctor looked after the garden himself.
He was very fond of animals and kept many kinds of pets. Besides the
gold-fish in the pond at the bottom of his garden, he had rabbits in the
pantry, white mice in his piano, a squirrel in the linen closet and a
hedgehog in the cellar. He had a cow with a calf too, and an old lame
horse-twenty-five years of age—and chickens, and pigeons, and two
lambs, and many other animals. But his favorite pets were Dab-Dab the
duck, Jip the dog, Gub-Gub the baby pig, Polynesia the parrot, and the
owl Too-Too.
His sister used to grumble about all these animals and said they made
the house untidy. And one day when an old lady with rheumatism came
to see the Doctor, she sat on the hedgehog who was sleeping on the sofa
and never came to see him any more, but drove every Saturday all the
way to Oxenthorpe, another town ten miles off, to see a different doctor.
Then his sister, Sarah Dolittle, came to him and said,
"John, how can you expect sick people to come and see you when you
keep all these animals in the house? It's a fine doctor would have his
parlor full of hedgehogs and mice! That's the fourth personage these
animals have driven away. Squire Jenkins and the Parson say they
wouldn't come near your house again—no matter how sick they are. We
are getting poorer every day. If you go on like this, none of the best
people will have you for a doctor."
"But I like the animals better than the 'best people'," said the Doctor.
"You are ridiculous," said his sister, and walked out of the room.
So, as time went on, the Doctor got more and more animals; and the
people who came to see him got less and less. Till at last he had no one
left—except the Cat's-meat-Man, who didn't mind any kind of animals.
But the Cat's-meat Man wasn't very rich and he only got sick once a
year—at Christmas-time, when he used to give the Doctor sixpence for a
bottle of medicine.
Sixpence a year wasn't enough to live on—even in those days, long ago;
and if the Doctor hadn't had some money saved up in his money-box, no
one knows what would have happened.
And he kept on getting still more pets; and of course it cost a lot to feed
them. And the money he had saved up grew littler and littler.
Then he sold his piano, and let the mice live in a bureau-drawer. But the
money he got for that too began to go, so he sold the brown suit he wore
on Sundays and went on becoming poorer and poorer.
And now, when he walked down the street in his high hat, people
would say to one another, "There goes John Dolittle, M.D.! There was a
time when he was the best known doctor in the West Country—Look at
him now—He hasn't any money and his stockings are full of holes!"
But the dogs and the cats and the children still ran up and followed him
through the town—the same as they had done when he was rich.
THE SECOND CHAPTER
ANIMAL LANGUAGE
IT happened one day that the Doctor was sitting in his kitchen talking
with the Cat's-meat-Man who had come to see him with a stomach-ache.
"Why don't you give up being a people's doctor, and be an animaldoctor?" asked the Cat's-meat-Man.
The parrot, Polynesia, was sitting in the window looking out at the rain
and singing a sailor-song to herself. She stopped singing and started to
listen.
"You see, Doctor," the Cat's-meat-Man went on, "you know all about
animals—much more than what these here vets do. That book you
wrote—about cats, why, it's wonderful! I can't read or write myself—or
maybe I'D write some books. But my wife, Theodosia, she's a scholar,
she is. And she read your book to me. Well, it's wonderful—that's all can
be said—wonderful. You might have been a cat yourself. You know the
way they think. And listen: you can make a lot of money doctoring
animals. Do you know that? You see, I'd send all the old women who
had sick cats or dogs to you. And if they didn't get sick fast enough, I
could put something in the meat I sell 'em to make 'em sick, see?"
"Oh, no," said the Doctor quickly. "You mustn't do that. That wouldn't
be right."
"Oh, I didn't mean real sick," answered the Cat's-meat-Man. "Just a little
something to make them droopy-like was what I had reference to. But as
you say, maybe it ain't quite fair on the animals. But they'll get sick
anyway, because the old women always give 'em too much to eat. And
look, all the farmers 'round about who had lame horses and weak
lambs—they'd come. Be an animal-doctor."
When the Cat's-meat-Man had gone the parrot flew off the window on
to the Doctor's table and said,
"That man's got sense. That's what you ought to do. Be an animal-doctor.
Give the silly people up—if they haven't brains enough to see you're the
best doctor in the world. Take care of animals instead—THEY'll soon
find it out. Be an animal-doctor."
"Oh, there are plenty of animal-doctors," said John Dolittle, putting the
flower-pots outside on the window-sill to get the rain.
"Yes, there ARE plenty," said Polynesia. "But none of them are any good
at all. Now listen, Doctor, and I'll tell you something. Did you know that
animals can talk?"
"I knew that parrots can talk," said the Doctor.
"Oh, we parrots can talk in two languages—people's language and birdlanguage," said Polynesia proudly. "If I say, 'Polly wants a cracker,' you
understand me. But hear this: Ka-ka oi-ee, fee-fee?"
"Good Gracious!" cried the Doctor. "What does that mean?"
"That means, 'Is the porridge hot yet?'—in bird-language."
"My! You don't say so!" said the Doctor. "You never talked that way to
me before."
"What would have been the good?" said Polynesia, dusting some
cracker-crumbs off her left wing. "You wouldn't have understood me if I
had."
"Tell me some more," said the Doctor, all excited; and he rushed over to
the dresser-drawer and came back with the butcher's book and a pencil.
"Now don't go too fast—and I'll write it down. This is interesting—very
interesting—something quite new. Give me the Birds' A.B.C. first—
slowly now."
So that was the way the Doctor came to know that animals had a
language of their own and could talk to one another. And all that
afternoon, while it was raining, Polynesia sat on the kitchen table giving
him bird words to put down in the book.
At tea-time, when the dog, Jip, came in, the parrot said to the Doctor,
"See, HE'S talking to you."
"Looks to me as though he were scratching his ear," said the Doctor.
"But animals don't always speak with their mouths," said the parrot in a
high voice, raising her eyebrows. "They talk with their ears, with their
feet, with their tails—with everything. Sometimes they don't WANT to
make a noise. Do you see now the way he's twitching up one side of his
nose?"
"What's that mean?" asked the Doctor.
"That means, 'Can't you see that it has stopped raining?'" Polynesia
answered. "He is asking you a question. Dogs nearly always use their
noses for asking questions."
After a while, with the parrot's help, the Doctor got to learn the language
of the animals so well that he could talk to them himself and understand
everything they said. Then he gave up being a people's doctor
altogether.
As soon as the Cat's-meat-Man had told every one that John Dolittle was
going to become an animal-doctor, old ladies began to bring him their
pet pugs and poodles who had eaten too much cake; and farmers came
many miles to show him sick cows and sheep.
One day a plow-horse was brought to him; and the poor thing was
terribly glad to find a man who could talk in horse-language.
"You know, Doctor," said the horse, "that vet over the hill knows nothing
at all. He has been treating me six weeks now—for spavins. What I need
is SPECTACLES. I am going blind in one eye. There's no reason why
horses shouldn't wear glasses, the same as people. But that stupid man
over the hill never even looked at my eyes. He kept on giving me big
pills. I tried to tell him; but he couldn't understand a word of horselanguage. What I need is spectacles."